Now let's examine the most important component regarding the asynchronous behavior of modern web applications: AJAX
Asynchronous JavaScript (And XML) - that is, XML is no longer valid, we use JSON.
The term AJAX is not the original name, it was coined 8 years ago by Jesse James Garnett to make the technology more exciting.
AJAX was originally named XMLHttpRequest(XHR).
(Here follows an aside: The term AJAX associates both the intellectual world of greek mythology and the trivial world of household cleansers).
AJAX: Asynchronous JavaScript.
Microsoft introduced AJAX in 1999 in their Internet Explorer 5 as Active-X object for their web-based Office products (Outlook etc.).
But it was made popular by Jesse James Garrett and O'Reilly at several conferences in 2005.
AJAX technologies allow manipulating the DOM dynamically without having to reload the complete page.
AJAX, in fact, is not one technology or a standard, but a bundle of technologies: HTML, CSS, JavaScript, DOM (Document Object Model), XHR (XMLHttpRequest), JSON, and REST.
Using Asynchronous JavaScript, the client can send HTTP requests to the server without the JavaScript engine of the browser having to wait for a response.
Thus, we switch from an originally synchronous behavior of a JS-based website to an asynchronous one.
We can send requests but we can continue interacting with the user interface without having to wait for a response from the server.
Google proved that back in 2005 with its web-based applications like Gmail, Google Maps etc.
So, we don't really enter new grounds but we are near the technological forefront.
Let's compare both approaches on the basis of some sequence diagrams.
(Aside: True sequence diagrams based on UML - Unified Modeling Language - are much more detailed and should directly translate into executable code. This is not the case here.(
(This is just to teach you some software engineering along the way.)
Anyway, here are two sequence diagrams.
On the left, the traditional method:
Webpages are called one after the other when a user clicks on a link and the complete content of the page is replaced by another page.
With asynchronous JavaScript, the user can continue to interact with the user interface of the website while ...
... one element - symbolized by the letter a - is replaced by the element symbolized by the letter b.
The rest of the page remains the same.
In the background, JavaScript sends a request to the server asynchronously to request the required information and to update the content of page 1.
The user stays on the page until the response to the request arrives and is executed.
This is the main difference between a multi-page application and a single-page application.
Let's dive into some more detail:
In the background, JavaScript communicates with the server.
In the foreground, JavaScript is used to implement the user interface.
First, a XMLHttpRequest object has to be created and assigned to the variable http.
Then, we issue a command to open a connection with open(), that is, we request the server by transferring the URL and some other parameters (e.g. if we want to act synchronously or asynchronously).
We open the connection and register an event handler - added to onreadystatechange - which is called when the response of the server arrives.
Next, we make a non-blocking request using send().
As soon as the attribute of the XMLHttpRequest object reaches a specific value - in this case 4, which means that the message is complete - the event handler will process it and reconfigure the DOM according to the message contained in the response.
What are the pros and xons of AJAX?
The benefits outweigh the disadvantages, so much in advance.
We don't depend on proprietary plugins like Adobe Flash or Microsoft Silverlight or safety-critical Java applets anymore.
Those were the techniques that were used to implement single-page apps before AJAX came up.
However, with those techniques, you always perceived a structural break in a page.
Just recall what a JavaScript applet looked like ten years ago, it's really easy to recognize.
With AJAX, you get the fluid interaction behavior on a web page that users were used to from desktop applications.
That is to say: reactive, fluid and with a lot of graphics options.
Before AJAX, when the user clicked on a link and the complete page had to be reloaded, there was always a flicker, a sudden brightening of the page.
This behavior was noticeable to the user, it was obvious, that something has changed.
When using AJAX, JavaScript is continuously processed in the foreground without blocking anything. Only when there is new information, the respective element of the DOM will be changed.
The cons: The Same Origin Policy - a security measure - prevents AJAX calls across domains.
The browser calls JavaScript only if it comes from the same page where it originated.
The URI scheme must be completely identical.
If you call JS from another domain, the AJAX call is blocked for security reasons. That's a feature!
Today however, you want to make use of many different APIs.
That means, you have to change origin servers now and again. To make this possible, it's necessary to apply some tricks.
The W3C has recognized the problem and recommends the CORS standard (Cross-Origin Resource Sharing).
This standard allows for information exchange between server and browser.
JavaScript beginners are often irritated when they find that a web application doesn't run locally in the browser..
This is due to the Same Origin Policy being violated.
If the code calls the http:// or https:// protocol but the file is fetched from a local disk using the file:/// protocol, the URI scheme is not identical and therefore, the Same Origin Policy is violated.
Another disadvantage: In the early days of AJAX applications, the back button of the browser couldn't be used to return to a previous state of an application.
When the user hit the back button, instead of returning to the previous page, he returned to the page that he had visited before calling the single page application.
Thus, the user unintentionally left the application. That was no different with ARSnova.
Whenever someone hit the back button, he left the application. That is no longer the case.
Another difficulty was to achieve a good ranking in search engines if you can only specify one page but no new contents or states of the app.
However, these problems have been resolved by standards such as History API and some other "tricks".
You can reread all those specifications in the Working Draft of the W3C.
You may also find it interesting to see how such standards are documented.
And you won't believe it, it is even intelligible!
The material you find in the Working Drafts of the W3C or in the Requests for Comments of other standardization organizations, is the stuff that books are made of.
Everything that is written there, you will sooner or later see in a book somewhere. It's almost plagiarism.
Well, have a look at your leisure.
Please pay special attention to the attributes and the methods of the XMLHttpRequest object.
There's not a lot to read, it's manageable:)
By working through this draft you will get a better understanding of AJAX technologies.
Now, open ARSnova in Firefox, as shown in the image above.
Log in, give feedback, and look at the HTTP traffic in Firebug.
In the network tab, choose XHR (XMLHttpRequest).
In the Header section, you see the framework that we used - a JavaScript framework.
The SetRequestHeader parameter tells the server that we have a local XMLHttpRequest object that is waiting for a response.
Practice makes perfect;)
It is very important to analyze the traffic protocols of existent applications to study and understand the terms and processes involved.